Update and expand theory sections (#3114)
ROCm/rocm-systems: projects/hip/docs/understand/performance_optimization.rst

.. meta::
  :description: This chapter explains performance concepts and theoretical
    models for understanding AMD GPU performance
  :keywords: AMD, ROCm, HIP, performance, theory, roofline, occupancy,
    bandwidth, arithmetic intensity

.. _performance_optimization:

*******************************************************************************
Understanding GPU performance
*******************************************************************************

> This chapter explains the theoretical foundations of GPU performance on AMD

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This topic explains the theoretical foundations of GPU performance on AMD
```

hardware. Understanding these concepts helps you analyze performance
characteristics, identify bottlenecks, and make informed optimization
decisions.

For practical optimization techniques and step-by-step guidance, see
:doc:`../how-to/performance_guidelines`.

.. _performance_bottlenecks:

Performance bottlenecks
=======================

The literal neck of a bottle limits the rate at which liquid can be poured;
a performance bottleneck in a computing system similarly limits the rate at

> which work can be completed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The neck of a bottle limits the rate at which liquid can be poured.
A performance bottleneck in a computing system similarly limits the rate at
which work can be completed.
```

overhead, latency, and control-divergence effects.

The point where the diagonal and horizontal roofs intersect is called the
ridge point. Its x-coordinate gives the minimum arithmetic intensity
required to escape the memory bottleneck. Systems with ridge points farther
to the left are easier to saturate, but over time, improvements in compute
throughput have far outpaced memory growth—pushing ridge points steadily to
the right.

On AMD platforms, roofline analysis is built into ROCm's profiling and
performance visualization ecosystem.
:doc:`rocprofv3 <rocprofiler-sdk:how-to/using-rocprofv3>` can be used to gather
achieved FLOPs, memory transactions, and operational intensity.

The roofline model's elegance lies in its simplicity—but also in its
deliberate omissions. It ignores latency entirely, focusing only on
sustained throughput limits. Understanding those assumptions—and when they
hold—is essential to applying the model correctly.

.. _compute_bound:

Compute-bound performance
=========================

A kernel is compute-bound when its performance is limited by the GPU's
arithmetic throughput rather than memory bandwidth. These kernels have high

> arithmetic intensity and spend most cycles executing arithmetic operations.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
arithmetic intensity, spending most cycles executing arithmetic operations.
```

  :math:`6N^2 \text{ bytes}` → :math:`\mathcal{O}(N)` scaling

Matrix multiplication scales linearly in arithmetic intensity—
:math:`\mathcal{O}(N^3)` operations versus :math:`\mathcal{O}(N^2)`
memory—making it an ideal match for high-throughput architectures. This
favorable scaling is a key reason why many machine-learning algorithms built
around dense linear algebra achieve high GPU utilization.

Techniques that shift memory transfers to additional compute operations
reduce memory traffic but increase arithmetic load, thereby raising the
arithmetic intensity. For example:

* Compressing data in :ref:`global memory <hbm>` reduces bytes transferred
  but adds decompression arithmetic—raising arithmetic intensity
* In training and inference of neural networks, techniques like gradient
  checkpointing reduce memory storage of activations (fewer bytes stored
  and loaded) but add recompute work—again increasing arithmetic intensity

.. _latency_hiding:

Latency hiding mechanisms
==========================

GPUs hide memory and instruction latency through massive hardware
multithreading rather than complex CPU techniques like out-of-order
execution.

> Latency hiding is the strategy of masking long-latency operations by
> running many of them concurrently. On AMD GPUs, performant kernels
> interleave the execution of many threads across wavefronts so overall
> throughput stays high even when individual instructions take many cycles.
> When one wavefront stalls on a slow :ref:`global-memory <hbm>` access, the
> scheduler immediately issues instructions from another eligible wavefront.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Latency hiding is the strategy of masking long-latency operations by
running them concurrently. On AMD GPUs, performant kernels
interleave the execution of many threads across wavefronts keeping overall
throughput high even when individual instructions take many cycles.
When one wavefront stalls on a slow :ref:`global-memory <hbm>` access, the
scheduler immediately issues instructions from another eligible wavefront.
```

How latency hiding works:

* **Wavefront switching**: Context switches occur every cycle with zero
  overhead
* **Multiple wavefronts per CU**: Many concurrent wavefronts supported
* **Instruction-level parallelism**: Multiple independent instructions in
  flight

This keeps the compute units busy: while one wavefront drives
:ref:`MFMA matrix ops <mfma_units>`, another runs scalar and vector ALU
work (e.g., quantize and dequantize), and a third issues loads and stores
through the memory pipeline (LDS, L1, and L2 ↔ :ref:`HBM <hbm>`).

The hardware can completely hide memory latency if there are enough active
wavefronts with independent work. The number of instructions required from
other wavefronts to hide latency depends on the specific memory latency and

> instruction throughput characteristics of the GPU.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The hardware can completely hide memory latency if there are enough active
wavefronts with independent work. The number of instructions required from
other wavefronts to hide latency depends on the GPU's specific memory latency and
instruction throughput characteristics.
```

Wavefront execution states
==========================

The state of the wavefronts executing a kernel on an AMD GPU can be
described using several non-exclusive terms—active, stalled, eligible, and
selected.

A wavefront is considered **active** from the time its threads begin
executing until all threads in that wavefront have completed the kernel.
Active wavefronts form the pool from which the wavefront schedulers select

> candidates for instruction issue each cycle.

Reviewer: Is this phrase correct?
for instruction issue each cycle

Author: It is correct ("instruction issue" is a fixed term), but maybe a bit unclear. I've rephrased the sentence.

An **eligible** wavefront is an active wavefront ready to issue its next
instruction. For a wavefront to be eligible:

* Its next instruction has been fetched
* The required pipeline (vector ALU, MFMA, or memory) is available
* All data dependencies have been resolved

> * No synchronization barriers (e.g., ``s_barrier``) are pending

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* No synchronization barriers (for example, ``s_barrier``) are pending
```

performance. Effective latency hiding on AMD hardware relies on keeping
enough active and eligible wavefronts resident so that the schedulers
always have work to select, ensuring the CU pipelines remain fully
utilized.

.. _occupancy:

Occupancy theory
================

Occupancy measures the ratio of active wavefronts to the maximum possible
wavefronts on a compute unit.

.. math::

   \text{Occupancy} = \frac{\text{Active Wavefronts}}{\text{Max Wavefronts per CU}}

There are two common ways to measure it:

* **Theoretical occupancy**: The upper limit determined by the kernel's
  launch configuration (threads per block, register use, LDS use) and the
  hardware limits of the CU
* **Achieved occupancy**: The actual number of wavefronts active during
  kernel execution, i.e., on active cycles

As part of the AMD execution model, all threads in a work-group are
scheduled onto the same CU. Each CU has finite resources—Vector
General-Purpose Registers (VGPRs), Scalar General-Purpose Registers
(SGPRs), :ref:`LDS <lds>` (shared memory), and wave slots—that must be
shared among all resident work-groups. These constraints jointly determine

> the maximum number of active wavefronts.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As part of the AMD execution model, all threads in a work group are
scheduled to the same CU. Each CU has finite resources—Vector
General-Purpose Registers (VGPRs), Scalar General-Purpose Registers
(SGPRs), :ref:`LDS <lds>` (shared memory), and wave slots—that must be
shared among all resident work-groups. These constraints jointly determine
the maximum number of active wavefronts.
```

* Optimal occupancy depends on kernel characteristics
* Memory-bound kernels benefit more from high occupancy

Low occupancy often reduces performance when there aren't enough eligible
wavefronts to hide memory or arithmetic latency, causing low issue
efficiency and underutilized pipelines. However, once occupancy is
sufficient for latency hiding, increasing it further can hurt performance

> by reducing available registers or LDS per wavefront—both of which can

Reviewer: ```suggestion
by reducing the number of available registers or LDS per wavefront—both of which can
```

limit arithmetic intensity.

In short, occupancy measures how fully a CU is loaded, not how efficiently

> it is utilized. High-performance kernels (e.g., MFMA-based GEMMs on CDNA)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
it is utilized. High-performance kernels (for example, MFMA-based GEMMs on CDNA)
```

Performance metrics explained
==============================

> Understanding performance metrics helps you analyze GPU behavior:

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Understanding performance metrics is essential for analyzing GPU behavior:
```

Peak rate
---------

Peak rate is the theoretical maximum throughput at which a hardware system
can complete work. It defines the absolute upper bound of GPU

> performance—the "speed of light" for that architecture.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Peak rate is the theoretical maximum throughput a hardware system can achieve. It represents the absolute upper bound of GPU performance—the architecture’s effective ‘speed of light.’
```
